“What is a bodhisatva’s skilled approach to relying on things? There are four things bodhisatvas
rely on. What are these four things they rely on?

They rely on the meaning and not on the letter, on knowledge and not on consciousness, on the
explicit meaning of the sutras and not the implicit meaning, and on the Dharma itself and
not on the person teaching it.

“Now, what is the meaning and what is the letter? The letter refers to involvement in mundane
activities, whilst the meaning refers to a realization of the reality that transcends the
world.

The letter refers to teachings on generosity, discipline, restraint, and contentment, whilst
the meaning refers to teachings on being disciplined, on calm abiding, on what is not new
and has no precedent.

The letter refers to the generally agreed-upon explanations of cyclic existence, whilst the
meaning refers to accomplishing that which cannot be experienced.

The letter refers to the well-known benefits of nirvana, whilst the meaning refers to the state
beyond constructions that is the complete nirvana naturally present in phenomena.

The letter refers to teaching according to the respective vehicles, whilst the meaning refers
to the knowledge that realizes the Dharma of the single path.

The letter refers to the teaching on not abandoning any sentient beings, whilst the meaning
refers to the purity of the three spheres of existence.

The letter refers to the teachings on disciplining one’s body, speech, and mind, as well as
to taking up the training in its entirety, and the qualities of purification, whilst the meaning
refers to the purity of unconditionality, not apprehending body, speech, or mind.

The letter refers to teachings on the destruction of malice, harshness, anger, pride, haughtiness,
and arrogance, and on patient acceptance and gentleness, whilst the meaning refers
to the attainment of a patient acceptance of the fact that phenomena are unborn.

The letter refers to teachings on all of the different ways of applying vigor with regard to
the roots of virtue, whilst the meaning refers to vigor which is not based on striving after
anything or leaving anything behind.

The letter refers to teachings on the liberative meditative states, and the attainments of concentration,
whilst the meaning refers to the knowledge that lies in cessation.

The letter refers to the root of wisdom, which is the ability to retain all learning, whilst
the meaning refers to the object that is beyond description.

The letter refers to the elucidation of the thirty-seven elements which are conducive to awakening,
whilst the meaning refers to the manifestation of the fruits of these thirty-seven
elements which are conducive to awakening.

The letter refers to the elucidation of suffering, [D171b]its origin, and the path, whilst the
meaning refers to the realization of cessation.

The letter refers to the elucidation of the sequence which begins with ignorance and ends with
aging and death, whilst the meaning refers to the cessation of ignorance, the cessation
of aging and death, and the cessation of everything in between.

The letter refers to teachings on the prerequisites of calm abiding and insight meditation,
whilst the meaning refers to the knowledge of awareness and liberation.

The letter refers to teachings given for those who act out of desire, anger, confusion, or a
combination of them, whilst the meaning refers to the unperturbed liberation of the mind.

The letter refers to the elucidation of all obscurations, whilst the meaning refers to liberated
unobscured knowledge.

The letter refers to expressions of praise of the unlimited good qualities of the Three Jewels,
whilst the meaning refers to the attainment of the actual state which is beyond desire,
and the unconditioned good qualities of the Sangha.

The letter refers to descriptions of the bodhisatva’s training and his development of good qualities,
from the time when the awakening mind first arose in him until the time when he
sat on the seat of awakening, whilst the meaning refers to the perfect awakening of omniscient
knowledge which takes place in the space of a single moment of thought. In short, whatever
is included in the teachings of the eighty-four thousand collections of the Dharma is
what is known as the letter, whilst the object that cannot be expressed by means of any
kind of language, any syllables, or any letters, is the meaning.

“What are the sutras which have an implicit meaning? They express the letter, and one should
be careful to note that that is the way they present the matter. What are the sutras which
have an explicit meaning? They express the meaning, and one should be careful to recognize
that that is the way they present the matter. They are known as the sutras which have an
explicit meaning.

“What about relying on the Dharma and not on the person teaching it? The implicit meaning is
the meaning of the person, and it is not to be relied upon. The explicit meaning is the actual
way of things just as they are, and this is to be relied upon.“These are the four things
bodhisatvas rely on, and a bodhisatva, a great being, who is skilled in how to rely on
these things practices the perfection of wisdom.

“What is the bodhisatvas’ skilled approach to the letter? The bodhisatva is skilled in two things
as he practices the perfection of wisdom. What are these two things? He is skilled in
consciousness and he is skilled in knowledge.

“What is consciousness and what is knowledge in this context? Consciousness refers to the four
modes of consciousness. What are these four modes of consciousness? They are the position
consciousness takes when it is involved with form, along with the positions it takes when
it is involved with feeling, perception, and mental conditioning. This is what is meant
by consciousness.

What is knowledge? It is a complete comprehension of the fact that the skandha of knowledge
is not based in the five skandhas of grasping. This is what is meant by knowledge.

“Furthermore, consciousness is to be conscious of the earth element, of the water element, of
the fire element, and of the wind element. This is what is known as consciousness. Knowledge
of the unbreakable totality of phenomena, the knowledge that is not based upon the four
elements, is what is known as knowledge.

“Furthermore, what is known as consciousness is the cognitive experience of forms which are
recognized by the eye, it is the cognitive experience of sounds which are recognized by the
ear, smells which are recognized by the nose, tastes which are recognized by the tongue,
physical objects which are recognized by the body, and mental objects which are recognized
by the mind. This is what is known as consciousness. Relying on the knowledge where the
internal sense fields have come to rest and there is no movement towards the outer sense fields,
where there is no attempt to reach anything, is what is known as knowledge.

“Furthermore, what we call consciousness is the conscious experience which arises from the object,
and the conscious experience which arises from conceptions. This is what is known as
consciousness. When there is no grasping, no conceit, no ideation, and no bewilderment,
that is what is known as knowledge.

“Furthermore, consciousness relates to phenomena that are within the sphere of the conditioned,
and consciousness cannot approach the unconditioned. Understanding the unconditioned is
knowledge.“Furthermore, consciousness is based on arising and ceasing. That which does not
arise, does not cease, and does not remain, this is knowledge.

“Which sutras are those of explicit meaning, and which sutras are those of implicit meaning?
Those sutras that provide access to the path are known as implicit. Those sutras that provide
access to the fruits of the path are known as explicit. Those sutras that bring out the
relative truth are known as implicit. Those sutras that indicate the ultimate truth are
known as explicit.“Furthermore, those sutras that deal with the processes of action are known
as implicit. Those sutras that provide instructions for the elimination of action and
the vices are known as explicit.

“Furthermore, those sutras that provide instructions that explain the corruptions are known
as implicit. [MS124a]Those sutras that provide instructions for cleansing and purification
are known as explicit. Those sutras that inspire weariness with cyclic existence are known
as implicit. Those sutras that do not have recourse to a distinction between cyclic existence
and nirvana are known as explicit.

Those sutras that teach by means of a variety of words and expressions are known as implicit.
Those sutras that are profound, difficult to see, and difficult to fathom, are known as
explicit. Those sutras that are greatly elaborate, in order to delight the minds of sentient
beings, are known as implicit. Those sutras that use only a few words and phrases in order
to inspire reflection are known as explicit.

“Furthermore, those sutras that use a variety of terms, such as self, being, life force, person,
soul, human being, man, someone who acts, or someone who experiences, describing the
absence of agent as the presence of an agent, are known as implicit. Those sutras that teach
by means of emptiness, freedom from attributes, freedom from aspirations, the unarisen,
the unborn, non-occurring, non-being, no person, and freedom from the three times, are known
as explicit.

What is meant by dharma and what is meant by the person? The term person refers to when one
is established in the view of the person and engages with a particular dharma. The term dharma
refers to when one engages in the view of the person and is established in the dharma,
dharmadhatu.

