The youthful grow old,their bodies crippled and disfigured.Memory, intellect, and decisiveness
are taken away,and one is led through the door of death.Disease destroys one's power and
vitality.It robs one of all strength and courage,and dulls all the senses.With fading courage,
one is without protection.Death is like a ravenous rākṣasī,always hunting sentient
beings.With its power it drags them alongand drinks their precious life force.The world dreads
death.It is tormented by disease.Seeing this, I left in search of the Dharma,unaging,
undying, tranquil peace.The world is ablaze with three fires,and seeing no other protector
for living beings,I vowed to become a protector, a refuge,to be a rain of nectar to quench
the fires.Seeing that living beings have lost their way,without vision, blind and bewildered,I
vowed to give eyes to the world.To show them the path, I became a renunciant.Deluded
beings entertain doubt,dragged down and overcome by oppression.So I vowed to soothe their
guilty consciences.To proclaim the Dharma I became a renunciant.People argue among themselves,trying
to find each other's weak points, and being hurtful for no reason.So I vowed
to reconcile the hateful.For the benefit of all beings I became a renunciant.Because of the
strength of their pride, living beings have no respectfor their mothers, their fathers,
or the most precious ones.So in order to lower the banner of pride,I renounced the householder’s
life.I saw beings overcome by greed,their possessions bringing on their downfall.Seeing
this, I obtained the seven great treasuresand vowed to free living beings from poverty.Foolish
beings slay each other,whilst pointlessly trying to protect themselves.Seeing that
this body must inevitably be discardedI left the three forms of existence behind.For the
sake of those like youwho lack understanding, who fill the threefold world,I became a renunciant,so
that I might show them the way.I see the beings who have fallen into hellbeing
tortured in agonizing ways,with no end to all their horrible states.I became a renunciant,
their liberator.Seeing living beingsfighting each other like animals,moved by compassion
I became a renunciant,so that I might be a protector for those without protection.Seeing
living beings oppressed by Yamasuffering from intense hunger and thirst,I attained supreme
awakeningso that they might taste the sublime ambrosia.When I understood the human suffering
of always wanting more,and the immortals’ suffering of falling into another state of
existence,when I saw that the three worlds are pervadedby overt suffering, I became a renunciant.I
saw that living beings possessed by desireshave no trace of shame or modesty,that
just like dogs or pigs they liewith their mother, their sister, with their teacher’s wife.Living
beings are led astray, delighting in the pleasures of the senses,they are ensnared
by women.Seeing the futility of the life of a greedy merchant,I abandoned my home and became
a renunciant.Fools delight in the pleasures of the senses,and are overpowered by evil
and discord.I overpowered all the demonic forces,and became a renunciant to reach the awakened
state.When I saw all of this, this futile existence,and the thousands of evils that befall
the house-dweller,I abandoned land and propertyin order to completely put an end to
birth.

At this, the whole group of 500 householders was astounded, and they thought to themselves,
“This must be the Buddha!" Certain that "This is the Buddha! This is the Buddha!”, together
they spoke these verses to the Blessed One, as if with one voice:

Now that five hundred merchants terrified by old agehave approached the Victorious One,please
illuminate for us the supremeincomparable Dharma which puts an end to old age and death.Blessed
One, completely pure and cleansed of birth,free from becoming, released from fear,destroyer
of birth, please be our protector!Free the living beings trapped in this house of
becoming!Hero, free from passion, fully liberated,impeccable, stainless, pure-hearted,skilled
in training, peerless guide,release the precious rain of the immortal Dharma!Best of
men, the exquisite beauty of your form is unparalleled.There is no-one like you on earth
or in heaven,unrivaled, exceptional, without equal in this world,Sugata, greatest of the great,
uphold the Dharma!You who have cast off the three kinds of impurity,pure in vision,
the darkness covering your eyes has vanished.You who are free from darkness, dispeller of
the net of illusion,free of the dust of the world, utter the matchless Dharma!All that live
are defenseless against misery.Helpless, they fall into the ocean of existence.Victorious
One, have pity, compassion, save them! Be quick!With the heart of a loving friend, draw
them to the other shore!Bewildered by intoxicating conceit it is difficult to cross the river
of becoming.Amidst violent waves of ever-increasing disease and strife,the living have
fallen, and are carried irresistibly away.Call forth compassion, and pull them from the stream
of becoming!You are a golden mountain. Your body is completely pure.Your radiance surpasses
that of a billion suns.With a voice as pleasantly sweet as exalted Brahmā,speak the
exquisite words of the supreme Dharma!All this Dharma which is naturally pure,naturally
brilliant, pure from the outset,not proclaimed by anyone, cannot be heardfrom any other than
the unmade maker, he who sees all.Worker of goodness, endlessly praised,spontaneously skilled
in the ten powers,with a sky-like mind, of limitless wisdom, best of ascetics,most
generous, please teach the Dharma!

It then occurred to the Blessed One: “These 500 householders are indeed ripe with the potential
for virtue. I should therefore now teach them the Dharma so that they might all give up
the guise of householders, become renunciants, and attain the elimination of defilement.”The
Blessed One then took his seat on a throne floating in the sky,and at that, great joy,
faith, respect, and wonder arose in the 500 householders in the presence of the Blessed
One.The Blessed One then addressed the 500 householders: “Do you wish to be released from
ten afflictions? What are these ten afflictions? They are the affliction of birth, the affliction
of old age, the affliction of disease, the affliction of death, the affliction of
sorrow, the affliction of lamentation, the affliction of suffering, the affliction of depression,
the affliction of grief, and the affliction of cyclic existence. Householders, do
you wish to be released from these ten afflictions?

What, then, is the bodhisatva’s perfection of meditation, by which bodhisatvas, great beings
strive to practice the way of the bodhisatva?

Śāriputra, the bodhisatva has left desires behind. He has left evil, unwholesome qualities behind,
and attains and abides in the first dhyāna, the state of joy and happiness that is
born from aloofness, and that includes conceptualization and deliberation.

Then, Śāriputra, the bodhisatva, having stilled conceptualization and deliberation, with a mind
which has calmed itself and become focused, attains and abides in the second dhyāna, the
state of joy and happiness that is born from concentration, and that is without conceptualization
or deliberation.

Then, Śāriputra, the bodhisatva abides in equanimity because he is not attached to joy, and
with mindfulness and thoughtfulness experiences happiness in his body. This is how the noble
ones see it. He attains and abides in the third dhyāna, with equanimity and mindfulness,
abiding in happiness, without joy.

Then, Śāriputra, the bodhisatva, having rid himself of happiness, and of suffering, and having
already put an end to positivity and negativity of mind, attains and abides in the fourth
dhyāna, free from suffering and happiness, and with completely pure equanimity and mindfulness.

In this way, he practices meditation, and does not abandon the concentrated, completely pure,
completely cleansed, unblemished state of meditative concentration where the secondary vices
are absent.

What, then, is the bodhisatva’s practice of meditation? It is the practice of superior abilities
and knowledge which he accomplishes.

“What is a bodhisatva’s skilled approach to relying on things? There are four things bodhisatvas
rely on. What are these four things they rely on?

They rely on the meaning and not on the letter, on knowledge and not on consciousness, on the
explicit meaning of the sutras and not the implicit meaning, and on the Dharma itself and
not on the person teaching it.

“Now, what is the meaning and what is the letter? The letter refers to involvement in mundane
activities, whilst the meaning refers to a realization of the reality that transcends the
world.

The letter refers to teachings on generosity, discipline, restraint, and contentment, whilst
the meaning refers to teachings on being disciplined, on calm abiding, on what is not new
and has no precedent.

The letter refers to the generally agreed-upon explanations of cyclic existence, whilst the
meaning refers to accomplishing that which cannot be experienced.

The letter refers to the well-known benefits of nirvana, whilst the meaning refers to the state
beyond constructions that is the complete nirvana naturally present in phenomena.

The letter refers to teaching according to the respective vehicles, whilst the meaning refers
to the knowledge that realizes the Dharma of the single path.

The letter refers to the teaching on not abandoning any sentient beings, whilst the meaning
refers to the purity of the three spheres of existence.

The letter refers to the teachings on disciplining one’s body, speech, and mind, as well as
to taking up the training in its entirety, and the qualities of purification, whilst the meaning
refers to the purity of unconditionality, not apprehending body, speech, or mind.

The letter refers to teachings on the destruction of malice, harshness, anger, pride, haughtiness,
and arrogance, and on patient acceptance and gentleness, whilst the meaning refers
to the attainment of a patient acceptance of the fact that phenomena are unborn.

The letter refers to teachings on all of the different ways of applying vigor with regard to
the roots of virtue, whilst the meaning refers to vigor which is not based on striving after
anything or leaving anything behind.

The letter refers to teachings on the liberative meditative states, and the attainments of concentration,
whilst the meaning refers to the knowledge that lies in cessation.

The letter refers to the root of wisdom, which is the ability to retain all learning, whilst
the meaning refers to the object that is beyond description.

The letter refers to the elucidation of the thirty-seven elements which are conducive to awakening,
whilst the meaning refers to the manifestation of the fruits of these thirty-seven
elements which are conducive to awakening.

The letter refers to the elucidation of suffering, [D171b]its origin, and the path, whilst the
meaning refers to the realization of cessation.

The letter refers to the elucidation of the sequence which begins with ignorance and ends with
aging and death, whilst the meaning refers to the cessation of ignorance, the cessation
of aging and death, and the cessation of everything in between.

The letter refers to teachings on the prerequisites of calm abiding and insight meditation,
whilst the meaning refers to the knowledge of awareness and liberation.

The letter refers to teachings given for those who act out of desire, anger, confusion, or a
combination of them, whilst the meaning refers to the unperturbed liberation of the mind.

The letter refers to the elucidation of all obscurations, whilst the meaning refers to liberated
unobscured knowledge.

The letter refers to expressions of praise of the unlimited good qualities of the Three Jewels,
whilst the meaning refers to the attainment of the actual state which is beyond desire,
and the unconditioned good qualities of the Sangha.

The letter refers to descriptions of the bodhisatva’s training and his development of good qualities,
from the time when the awakening mind first arose in him until the time when he
sat on the seat of awakening, whilst the meaning refers to the perfect awakening of omniscient
knowledge which takes place in the space of a single moment of thought. In short, whatever
is included in the teachings of the eighty-four thousand collections of the Dharma is
what is known as the letter, whilst the object that cannot be expressed by means of any
kind of language, any syllables, or any letters, is the meaning.

“What are the sutras which have an implicit meaning? They express the letter, and one should
be careful to note that that is the way they present the matter. What are the sutras which
have an explicit meaning? They express the meaning, and one should be careful to recognize
that that is the way they present the matter. They are known as the sutras which have an
explicit meaning.

“What about relying on the Dharma and not on the person teaching it? The implicit meaning is
the meaning of the person, and it is not to be relied upon. The explicit meaning is the actual
way of things just as they are, and this is to be relied upon.“These are the four things
bodhisatvas rely on, and a bodhisatva, a great being, who is skilled in how to rely on
these things practices the perfection of wisdom.

“What is the bodhisatvas’ skilled approach to the letter? The bodhisatva is skilled in two things
as he practices the perfection of wisdom. What are these two things? He is skilled in
consciousness and he is skilled in knowledge.

“What is consciousness and what is knowledge in this context? Consciousness refers to the four
modes of consciousness. What are these four modes of consciousness? They are the position
consciousness takes when it is involved with form, along with the positions it takes when
it is involved with feeling, perception, and mental conditioning. This is what is meant
by consciousness.

What is knowledge? It is a complete comprehension of the fact that the skandha of knowledge
is not based in the five skandhas of grasping. This is what is meant by knowledge.

“Furthermore, consciousness is to be conscious of the earth element, of the water element, of
the fire element, and of the wind element. This is what is known as consciousness. Knowledge
of the unbreakable totality of phenomena, the knowledge that is not based upon the four
elements, is what is known as knowledge.

“Furthermore, what is known as consciousness is the cognitive experience of forms which are
recognized by the eye, it is the cognitive experience of sounds which are recognized by the
ear, smells which are recognized by the nose, tastes which are recognized by the tongue,
physical objects which are recognized by the body, and mental objects which are recognized
by the mind. This is what is known as consciousness. Relying on the knowledge where the
internal sense fields have come to rest and there is no movement towards the outer sense fields,
where there is no attempt to reach anything, is what is known as knowledge.

“Furthermore, what we call consciousness is the conscious experience which arises from the object,
and the conscious experience which arises from conceptions. This is what is known as
consciousness. When there is no grasping, no conceit, no ideation, and no bewilderment,
that is what is known as knowledge.

“Furthermore, consciousness relates to phenomena that are within the sphere of the conditioned,
and consciousness cannot approach the unconditioned. Understanding the unconditioned is
knowledge.“Furthermore, consciousness is based on arising and ceasing. That which does not
arise, does not cease, and does not remain, this is knowledge.

“Which sutras are those of explicit meaning, and which sutras are those of implicit meaning?
Those sutras that provide access to the path are known as implicit. Those sutras that provide
access to the fruits of the path are known as explicit. Those sutras that bring out the
relative truth are known as implicit. Those sutras that indicate the ultimate truth are
known as explicit.“Furthermore, those sutras that deal with the processes of action are known
as implicit. Those sutras that provide instructions for the elimination of action and
the vices are known as explicit.

“Furthermore, those sutras that provide instructions that explain the corruptions are known
as implicit. [MS124a]Those sutras that provide instructions for cleansing and purification
are known as explicit. Those sutras that inspire weariness with cyclic existence are known
as implicit. Those sutras that do not have recourse to a distinction between cyclic existence
and nirvana are known as explicit.

Those sutras that teach by means of a variety of words and expressions are known as implicit.
Those sutras that are profound, difficult to see, and difficult to fathom, are known as
explicit. Those sutras that are greatly elaborate, in order to delight the minds of sentient
beings, are known as implicit. Those sutras that use only a few words and phrases in order
to inspire reflection are known as explicit.

“Furthermore, those sutras that use a variety of terms, such as self, being, life force, person,
soul, human being, man, someone who acts, or someone who experiences, describing the
absence of agent as the presence of an agent, are known as implicit. Those sutras that teach
by means of emptiness, freedom from attributes, freedom from aspirations, the unarisen,
the unborn, non-occurring, non-being, no person, and freedom from the three times, are known
as explicit.

What is meant by dharma and what is meant by the person? The term person refers to when one
is established in the view of the person and engages with a particular dharma. The term dharma
refers to when one engages in the view of the person and is established in the dharma,
dharmadhatu.

“Furthermore, saying, ‘a person, a common person, a common outstanding person, a person who
follows his conviction, a person who follows the Dharma, one of the eight kinds of people,
a person who is a stream-entrant, a person who is a once-returner, a person who is a non-returner,
a person who is an arhat, a person who is a pratyekabuddha, a person who is a bodhisatva,
a person who takes birth in the world for the benefit of the many, for the happiness
of the many, for the love of the world, for the welfare, benefit, and happiness of a
great host of beings, of gods and men, and becomes a tathāgata, an arhat, a fully accomplished
buddha’—using the term ‘person’ in all of these ways the tathāgata uses conventional
truth in order to engage with sentient beings and to teach them. It is said, though, that
those who have any manifest attachment to these concepts have nothing to rely upon. In order
to provide them with something to rely upon the Lord said, ‘Rely on the Dharma itself and
not on the person.’“What, then, is the Dharma itself? It is that which is unchanging; that
which is not a fabrication; that which is not created; that which is not modified; that
which does not remain; that which has no foundation; that which has no root; that which
is complete sameness; [D173b]that which is the same as sameness, the same as non-sameness,
and the same as both sameness and non-sameness; that which is non-conceptual; that which
is free from application; [MS124b]that which is definitive; that which is not attained; that
which is the complete absence of anything that could be characterized as an autonomous
nature. This is what is known as the Dharma itself.“Those who rely on the Dharma itself in
this way, and who do not put their trust in the elements, have entered the door to the path
of the Dharma. For them, all phenomena become just like the Dharma itself, and any phenomenon
can then be used as a support. This is what is known as the four things bodhisatvas
rely on, and the bodhisatva who is skilled in relying on these things practices the perfection
of wisdom.“What is the bodhisatva’s skilled approach to accumulation? There are two
things bodhisatvas accumulate. What are these two things? They are merit and knowledge. What
is the accumulation of merit? It is the item of merit which is created through generosity,
the item of merit which is created through morality, and the item of merit which is created
through meditative cultivation. It is to remain in a mental state of love, and to get
involved out of compassion. It is to apply oneself to all the roots of virtue, and to confession
of one’s own evils and those of others. It is the item of merit which is created
through rejoicing in all the roots of virtue of all sentient beings throughout the three times,
of all those who are learning and who have no more to learn, of all pratyekabuddhas,
of those who are newly committed, of those who are engaged in practice, of those whose progress
is irreversible, of those who have only one birth remaining, the item of merit which
is created through rejoicing in those who have committed themselves, the lords, the buddhas
of the past, the future, and the present. It is the item of merit created through requesting
the Dharma from all the buddhas and all the noble ones. It is the item of merit created
through dedicating all one’s roots of virtue to awakening. It is to inspire the arising
of the mind of awakening in all those in whom the mind of awakening has not yet arisen.
[D174a]It is to teach the path of the perfections to those in whom the mind of awakening
has arisen, and to collect material wealth for the poor. It is to provide medicine for sick,
to treat them with respect, and to accept those who are in a wretched state with no hesitation.
It is to not conceal one’s failings, and to confess what one has done wrong. It is
to serve and revere, in many different ways, the lords, the buddhas of the present who have
reached final nirvana. It is to respect the gurus and preceptors as spiritual friends.
It is to search vigorously for the priceless, invaluable teachings. It is to show affection
for those who preach the Dharma, and to still thirst to listen to the Dharma even after
one has travelled for a hundred yojanas. It is to teach the Dharma without any thought of
material gain. It is to serve one’s parents. It is to show gratitude. It is to be grateful.
It is to have no regrets, and to not be satisfied with the merit one has accrued. It is
to guard one’s physical conduct and not act in a hypocritical manner. It is to guard one’s
speech, and not speak in a hypocritical manner. It is to guard one’s mind and not think
hypocritical thoughts. It is to establish monuments in honor of tathāgatas, which brings one
as much merit as is possessed by Brahmā. It is to perform boundless acts of worship which
lead one to attain the perfect characteristics, [MS125a]and to gather the accumulations
of various roots of virtue which lead one to attain the perfect characteristics. It is to
ornament one’s body with the absence of conceit. It is to ornament one’s speech with the
relinquishment of all wicked speech. It is to ornament the mind with an unimpeded intellect.
It is to ornament the buddha realms with acts of transformation by using one’s superior
abilities. It is to ornament the qualities of the Dharma with the purity of knowledge. It
is to ornament assemblies with abstention from slander, harsh words, and divisive talk. It
is to ornament the Dharma of non-attachment by upholding the Dharma. [D174b]It is to contribute
to the presentation of Dharma not being ruined, by offering encouragement which brings
delight. It is to provide effective teachings by removing obscurations and hindrances,
and by listening to the Dharma respectfully. It is to ornament the tree of awakening by
offering groves, and to ornament the seat of awakening by not relinquishing the mind of awakening,
the mind which precedes all roots of virtue. It is to purify birth and death by not
objectifying actions and the vices. It is to have a hand of wealth by giving away all one’s
precious valuable objects, and to make one’s wealth inexhaustible by increasing it through
the inexhaustible act of dedicating. “He displays no angry demeanor, and so he enjoys
the open hearts, smiling faces, and pleasant conversation of all sentient beings. He radiates
the same light on all sentient beings, and so he attains the adornment of sameness.
He does not leave those who lack learning in darkness, and emits an array of light. His morality
and his merit prosper, and so his births become pure. He does not present arguments
to try to excuse his failures, and so the womb is purified. He maintains the purity of the
ten wholesome forms of conduct, and so he is reborn as a god or a human being. He observes
all the guidelines, and so attains unfaltering determination. He is not a teacher who holds
any teachings back, and so he becomes a lord of the Dharma. His motivation is pure and
excellent, and so the whole world becomes available to him. He does not settle for limited
forms of conduct, but places his confidence in the vastness of the Dharma. By not abandoning
the mind of omniscience, he takes up all meritorious kinds of action. Impelled by faith,
he perfects the seven kinds of riches. He honors his previous commitments, and so he
does not deceive anyone in the world. He perfects the wholesome forms of conduct, and so he
perfects all the teachings of the Buddha. This is what is known as the bodhisatva’s skilled
approach to accumulation. “What is the bodhisatva’s skilled approach to the accumulation
of knowledge? Knowledge comes about on the basis of a particular cause, and there are different
causes and conditions through which knowledge is attained. What are these causes?
[D175a]What are these conditions? They are: to have a strong desire to search for the Dharma;
to follow a friend who has attained knowledge; to rely on the knowledge of buddhas, and
not to rely on the knowledge of śrāvakas or pratyekabuddhas; not to entertain any pride
with respect to these things; and to have affection for one’s guru, to have affection for
one’s teacher.

