Householder, it was in order to get rid of all such views caused by these confused beliefs and
mistaken ideas that I decided to attain unsurpassed perfect awakening, and with that conviction
I left ordinary household life behind and became a renunciant.”

Then, in order to clarify this point further, the Blessed One went on to speak these verses:

The idea of a self, the idea of a being,as well as the idea of a soul,these are the confused,
mistaken ideasthat cloud the minds of all immature ordinary people.

They base themselves on views of annihilationand permanence, the view of no activity.In order
to establish perfect viewsI left and became a monk.

“Alas householder! I have seen that one who is involved with the world is pierced by ten great
arrows throughout uncountable hundreds, thousands, millions, billions of ages.

What are these ten great arrows? They are the arrow of thirst,

the arrow of ignorance,

the arrow of desire,

the arrow of passion,

the arrow of hatred,

the arrow of delusion,

the arrow of pride,

the arrow of views,

the arrow of existence,

and the arrow of non-existence.

Because of these ten great arrows, householder, I decided to attain unsurpassed perfect awakening
in order to get rid of all arrows, and with that conviction I left ordinary household
life behind and became a renunciant.”

Then, in order to clarify this point further, the Blessed One went on to speak these verses:

There is no end in sight for thosetormented by the arrows of desire.Blinded by ignorancethey
travel from misery to misery.

Taking hold of the skandhasthey are tortured by the arrows of desire,consumed by the arrows
of passion,stupefied by the arrows of anger.

They are bound by the arrows of delusion,swollen by the arrows of pride,fettered by the arrows
of viewsof existence and non-existence.

All immature ordinary peoplequarrel among themselves.Saying “that is a lie, this is the truth”they
argue with each other.

In order to remove these arrowsthe tathāgatas appear in the world.For beings tormented by these
arrows,they are protectors and the ultimate refuge.

“Furthermore, householder, I have seen that one who is involved with the world remains conditioned
by ten phenomena that spring from desire.

What are these ten phenomena?

They are as follows: because of desire one strives to obtain things,

and because of this striving one does obtain things.

When one obtains things one develops a sense of ownership,

and this sense of ownership causes one to develop firm opinions.

Such firm opinions lead to craving,

and this craving creates attachment.

This attachment causes envy,

which in turn leads one to accumulate property.

When one accumulates property one needs to protect and defend it,

and this causes suffering.

In order to safeguard their property, people use sticks and other weapons.

They get involved in quarrels, conflicts, feuds, and disputes,

and this leads them to make unfounded accusations

and to do many other such evil, unwholesome things.

Householder, when I saw that one who is involved with the world remains conditioned by these
ten phenomena that spring from desire,

I decided to attain the unsurpassed perfect awakening that has no root or foundation,

and with that conviction I left ordinary household life behind and became a renunciant.”

To emphasize that this is the way things are, he said the following:

Beings, swallowed by desire,everywhere perpetually strive to obtain things.Having obtained them,
they make them their own,and then firm opinions take hold.

“This is what I will make my purpose” they say,and craving grows.When craving arises,attachment
increases, leading in turn to envy.

