He then went on to speak these verses:

I saw that all immature, ordinary peopleare trapped in the cage of cyclic existence,that they
are tormented by birth,harassed by old age and disease.

They experience pain, they grieve.I left in order to protectthose who are under the sway of
death.I will free them from the cage of existence.

“Alas householder! I have seen the hatred caused by ten situations which lead to malice that
make those who are involved with the world fight among themselves.

What are these ten situations which lead to malice?

They are the malicious intent that arises when one thinks “I have been treated unjustly”,

the malicious intent that arises when one thinks “I am being treated unjustly”,

the malicious intent that arises when one thinks “I will be treated unjustly”,

the malicious intent that arises when one thinks “my loved one has been treated unjustly”,

the malicious intent that arises when one thinks “my loved one is being treated unjustly”,

the malicious intent that arises when one thinks “my loved one will be treated unjustly”,

the malicious intent that arises when one thinks “my enemy has gained an advantage”,

the malicious intent that arises when one thinks “my enemy is gaining an advantage”,

the malicious intent that arises when one thinks “my enemy will gain an advantage”,

as well as unjustified rage.

Householder, it was in order to get rid of all malice, caused by these ten situations that lead
to malice, that I decided to attain unsurpassed perfect awakening, and with that conviction
I left ordinary household life behind and became a renunciant.”

Then, in order to expand on this point, the Blessed One went on to speak these verses:

Alas, sentient beingsrelate to one another with anger,and all their malicestems from the ten
kinds of malice.

“I or my relativeswere treated unjustly, will be treated unjustly,are being treated unjustly.”This
gives rise to malice.

“Those who are not my friends,are receiving benefits,have received them, will receive them.”This
gives rise to malice.

Unjustified rage is the tenth wayin which malice spreads.I saw all this, and then left behindthe
senselessness created by malice.

“Alas householder! I have seen that one who is involved with the world is lost in the thicket
of dogmatic views and mistaken beliefs due to being ensnared by ten mistaken views and beliefs.

What are these ten beliefs? They are the mistaken belief in a self,

the mistaken belief in a being,

the mistaken belief in a soul,

the mistaken belief in a person,

the mistaken belief in annihilation,

the mistaken belief in eternity,

the mistaken belief that there is no action,

the mistaken belief that there is no causality,

the mistaken belief that actions have no consequences,

and the mistaken belief in false doctrines.

