Because of the vice of envythe world becomes thick with grasping.Because of grasping, one’s
need to safeguard one's propertygrows incessantly.

Due to the need to safeguard their propertythe immature resort to sticks and weapons,performing
all sorts of evil deeds,and then suffering escalates.

Seeing that it is from desirethat all suffering comes about,I decided to awaken to the unsurpassed
awakeningthat has no root or foundation.

"Furthermore, householder, I have seen that one who is involved with the world errs in ten ways
which doom him to error.

What are these ten kinds of error?

They are wrong view,

wrong intention,

wrong speech,

wrong action,

wrong livelihood,

wrong effort,

wrong mindfulness,

wrong concentration,

wrong liberation,

and wrong understanding.

Householder, when I saw that one who is involved with the world is doomed by these ten kinds
of error,

I decided to overcome them all and fully awaken to unsurpassed perfect awakening.

With that conviction, I left ordinary household life behind and became a renunciant.”

Then, to clarify this point further, the Blessed One spoke these verses:

Those who defend wrong views,who hold wrong intentions,who utter wrong speech,who perform wrong
activities,

have wrong livelihood, wrong effort,wrong mindfulness and concentration,attain wrong liberation,and
are intent upon wrong knowledge,

these immature people who stand fixedamong those doomed to errorI shall establish in right action.It
was in order to do this that I went forth into homelessness.

“Furthermore, householder, I have seen that one who is involved with the world sets out on the
wrong path by way of ten unwholesome actions, and is certain to sink into the lower realms,
to descend into the lower realms, to be borne into the lower realms.

What are these ten actions?

They are killing,

taking what is not given,

sexual misconduct,

lying,

slander,

uttering harsh words,

idle talk,

covetousness,

maliciousness,

and holding wrong views.

Householder, when I saw that one who is involved with the world sets out on the wrong path by
way of ten unwholesome actions, and is certain to sink into the lower realms, to descend
into the lower realms, to be borne into the lower realms,

I decided to leave all of these wrong paths behind and fully awaken to unsurpassed perfect awakening.

With that conviction, I left ordinary household life behind and became a renunciant.”

Then, to illustrate this point in further detail, the Blessed One spoke these verses:

Beings who take life,who steal the property of others,and who engage in sexual misconduct,soon
end up in hell.

Those who create discord, use harsh language,tell lies and are unreliable,these infantile fools,
chattering continuously,are bound by delusion.

Coveting the wealth of others,full of malicious intent,holding destructive views,many men are
led to the lower realms.

Three sins of the body,four committed by speech,three sins of the mind,these are the actions
of evil-doers.

Having committed an evil actthey go to the lower realms.I left in order to save myself,from
going to the lower realms.

“Furthermore, householder, I have seen that, alas, one who is involved with the world is tainted
by the defilements of major and minor vices in ten ways.

What are these ten ways?

They are the taint of envy,

the taint of immorality,

the taint of malice,

the taint of laziness,

the taint of distraction,

