“Furthermore, saying, ‘a person, a common person, a common outstanding person, a person who
follows his conviction, a person who follows the Dharma, one of the eight kinds of people,
a person who is a stream-entrant, a person who is a once-returner, a person who is a non-returner,
a person who is an arhat, a person who is a pratyekabuddha, a person who is a bodhisatva,
a person who takes birth in the world for the benefit of the many, for the happiness
of the many, for the love of the world, for the welfare, benefit, and happiness of a
great host of beings, of gods and men, and becomes a tathāgata, an arhat, a fully accomplished
buddha’—using the term ‘person’ in all of these ways the tathāgata uses conventional
truth in order to engage with sentient beings and to teach them. It is said, though, that
those who have any manifest attachment to these concepts have nothing to rely upon. In order
to provide them with something to rely upon the Lord said, ‘Rely on the Dharma itself and
not on the person.’“What, then, is the Dharma itself? It is that which is unchanging; that
which is not a fabrication; that which is not created; that which is not modified; that
which does not remain; that which has no foundation; that which has no root; that which
is complete sameness; [D173b]that which is the same as sameness, the same as non-sameness,
and the same as both sameness and non-sameness; that which is non-conceptual; that which
is free from application; [MS124b]that which is definitive; that which is not attained; that
which is the complete absence of anything that could be characterized as an autonomous
nature. This is what is known as the Dharma itself.“Those who rely on the Dharma itself in
this way, and who do not put their trust in the elements, have entered the door to the path
of the Dharma. For them, all phenomena become just like the Dharma itself, and any phenomenon
can then be used as a support. This is what is known as the four things bodhisatvas
rely on, and the bodhisatva who is skilled in relying on these things practices the perfection
of wisdom.“What is the bodhisatva’s skilled approach to accumulation? There are two
things bodhisatvas accumulate. What are these two things? They are merit and knowledge. What
is the accumulation of merit? It is the item of merit which is created through generosity,
the item of merit which is created through morality, and the item of merit which is created
through meditative cultivation. It is to remain in a mental state of love, and to get
involved out of compassion. It is to apply oneself to all the roots of virtue, and to confession
of one’s own evils and those of others. It is the item of merit which is created
through rejoicing in all the roots of virtue of all sentient beings throughout the three times,
of all those who are learning and who have no more to learn, of all pratyekabuddhas,
of those who are newly committed, of those who are engaged in practice, of those whose progress
is irreversible, of those who have only one birth remaining, the item of merit which
is created through rejoicing in those who have committed themselves, the lords, the buddhas
of the past, the future, and the present. It is the item of merit created through requesting
the Dharma from all the buddhas and all the noble ones. It is the item of merit created
through dedicating all one’s roots of virtue to awakening. It is to inspire the arising
of the mind of awakening in all those in whom the mind of awakening has not yet arisen.
[D174a]It is to teach the path of the perfections to those in whom the mind of awakening
has arisen, and to collect material wealth for the poor. It is to provide medicine for sick,
to treat them with respect, and to accept those who are in a wretched state with no hesitation.
It is to not conceal one’s failings, and to confess what one has done wrong. It is
to serve and revere, in many different ways, the lords, the buddhas of the present who have
reached final nirvana. It is to respect the gurus and preceptors as spiritual friends.
It is to search vigorously for the priceless, invaluable teachings. It is to show affection
for those who preach the Dharma, and to still thirst to listen to the Dharma even after
one has travelled for a hundred yojanas. It is to teach the Dharma without any thought of
material gain. It is to serve one’s parents. It is to show gratitude. It is to be grateful.
It is to have no regrets, and to not be satisfied with the merit one has accrued. It is
to guard one’s physical conduct and not act in a hypocritical manner. It is to guard one’s
speech, and not speak in a hypocritical manner. It is to guard one’s mind and not think
hypocritical thoughts. It is to establish monuments in honor of tathāgatas, which brings one
as much merit as is possessed by Brahmā. It is to perform boundless acts of worship which
lead one to attain the perfect characteristics, [MS125a]and to gather the accumulations
of various roots of virtue which lead one to attain the perfect characteristics. It is to
ornament one’s body with the absence of conceit. It is to ornament one’s speech with the
relinquishment of all wicked speech. It is to ornament the mind with an unimpeded intellect.
It is to ornament the buddha realms with acts of transformation by using one’s superior
abilities. It is to ornament the qualities of the Dharma with the purity of knowledge. It
is to ornament assemblies with abstention from slander, harsh words, and divisive talk. It
is to ornament the Dharma of non-attachment by upholding the Dharma. [D174b]It is to contribute
to the presentation of Dharma not being ruined, by offering encouragement which brings
delight. It is to provide effective teachings by removing obscurations and hindrances,
and by listening to the Dharma respectfully. It is to ornament the tree of awakening by
offering groves, and to ornament the seat of awakening by not relinquishing the mind of awakening,
the mind which precedes all roots of virtue. It is to purify birth and death by not
objectifying actions and the vices. It is to have a hand of wealth by giving away all one’s
precious valuable objects, and to make one’s wealth inexhaustible by increasing it through
the inexhaustible act of dedicating. “He displays no angry demeanor, and so he enjoys
the open hearts, smiling faces, and pleasant conversation of all sentient beings. He radiates
the same light on all sentient beings, and so he attains the adornment of sameness.
He does not leave those who lack learning in darkness, and emits an array of light. His morality
and his merit prosper, and so his births become pure. He does not present arguments
to try to excuse his failures, and so the womb is purified. He maintains the purity of the
ten wholesome forms of conduct, and so he is reborn as a god or a human being. He observes
all the guidelines, and so attains unfaltering determination. He is not a teacher who holds
any teachings back, and so he becomes a lord of the Dharma. His motivation is pure and
excellent, and so the whole world becomes available to him. He does not settle for limited
forms of conduct, but places his confidence in the vastness of the Dharma. By not abandoning
the mind of omniscience, he takes up all meritorious kinds of action. Impelled by faith,
he perfects the seven kinds of riches. He honors his previous commitments, and so he
does not deceive anyone in the world. He perfects the wholesome forms of conduct, and so he
perfects all the teachings of the Buddha. This is what is known as the bodhisatva’s skilled
approach to accumulation. “What is the bodhisatva’s skilled approach to the accumulation
of knowledge? Knowledge comes about on the basis of a particular cause, and there are different
causes and conditions through which knowledge is attained. What are these causes?
[D175a]What are these conditions? They are: to have a strong desire to search for the Dharma;
to follow a friend who has attained knowledge; to rely on the knowledge of buddhas, and
not to rely on the knowledge of śrāvakas or pratyekabuddhas; not to entertain any pride
with respect to these things; and to have affection for one’s guru, to have affection for
one’s teacher.

